structure:
- earth
- atmosphere
- boundary between earth and atmosphere

systems:
- water cycle: circulation of meteoric water through the hydrosphere, atmosphere and upper parts of crust
	- drainage system
		- surface drainage system
		- subsurface drainage system
	- geographic area of drainage system is called a **drainage basin**, also called **watershed** in USA, **catchment** in UK
- rock cycle
- plate tectonics

macro level: layer of earth - crust, mantle, core; plates
micro level: rock - igneous, metamorphic, sedimentary; rock - mixtures of crystalline forms of minerals (quartz (SiO2), feldspars (aluminium silicates with potassium, sodium, or calcium), clay minerals (complex aluminium silicates), ferromagnesian (iron, magnesium, calcium silicates))

---

That the surface temperatures of Earth span the phase boundaries of H2O has not only promoted the evolution of life on the planet, but has led to the diversity of surface processes involved in the evolution of the planet’s surface. Ice sculpts landscapes in one way, water as rivers another, water as raindrops another. This diversity is mirrored in the landscapes.

We introduce the two chief drivers of geomorphic processes. The Earth’s surface is the boundary between rock put in motion by deep geophysical processes and the atmosphere put in motion by uneven solar heating. Neither motion is steady. Earthquakes punctuate the motion of the rock. Storms punctuate the motion of the atmosphere.

The role of the atmosphere is yet more complicated. Even the statistical mean of the weather – the climate – changes on timescales over which landscapes evolve.

We live on a blue, white, brown, and green, nearly spherical, spinning, canted planet, 150 million kilometers from a medium-sized 4.5-billion-year-old star (Figure 1.0). One moon adorns the sky and tugs the ocean of its parent planet into a giant moving permanent wave. The moon was born early of a massive collision. That event set the planet spinning on an axis tilted with respect to the plane of the ecliptic, yielding daily and seasonal variations in radiation reaching the surface. The Earth is cooling down. Heat moved efficiently toward the surface by convection of the mantle is more slowly conducted through the outermost, coolest layer, which behaves as a solid on geological timescales, and which is broken into a small number of tectonic plates. The descent of old, cold, thickened plates from the surface also drives a creeping circulation of the mantle, at speeds of several cm per year, and establishes the relative motions of the plates. These motions crinkle the margins of the plates, generating belts of mountains, and drive volcanism that dots the topography with volcanoes where plates descend. But this topography is subject to attack. That the Earth is both blue and white reflects the fact that water can be found in all three phases at the surface of the planet – blue liquid water, white water vapor (clouds), and ice. This unique aspect of Earth is allowed by being the right distance from the Sun, having an atmosphere that contains gases capable of absorbing long-wavelength radiation, and being large enough to retain these gases. The atmosphere and ocean of the planet are in motion as well; unlike the mantle, motion of fluids of the hydrosphere and atmosphere is turbulent, at speeds up to many meters per second, driven by both the uneven solar heating of the planet and its spin. Water evaporated from lakes and oceans, and transpired by land plants, is transported by storms spawned within the atmosphere, and then precipitates as either rain or snow. It is the motion of these substances, rain immediately and snow more slowly, where it accumulates sufficiently to become a glacier, moving down slopes ultimately generated by crustal processes, that leads to the dissection and sculpting of the land surface. None of these phenomena are steady on geologic timescales. Wind, water, and ice erode, transport and deposit sediment in discrete episodes of activity. Movement of continents on the surface of the planet slowly changes the circulation of atmosphere and oceans. The celestial mechanics of our planet’s motion, which includes interactions with other planets in the solar system, leads to variations in the Earth’s orbit, which in turn drive variation in the delivery of energy to the Earth. In the last couple of million years, this has resulted in numerous major swings in the climate on the Earth, leading to the growth and demise of huge ice sheets on northern continents. These set the climatic context within which human civilization has arisen and have greatly influenced the landscapes with which we interact.


climatic swings between **glacials** and **interglacials**

tensional, compressive, shear stresses -> normal, reverse, transform fault. stress from movement of tectonic plates, fault at divergent/convergent/transform plate boundaries. faults have no length scales. fault is a break in a rock formation (fracture) + a slip along it.

earthquake
- when stress overcomes **friction**, movement of slip along faults produces **seismic waves** that propagates through **earth's layers**
- rupture, elastic rebound, aftershocks
- earthquake characterization: location, magnitude (amount of energy released), intensity (destructive effects of ground shaking)

forces that act on geomorphic materials:
- gravitational forces
- fluid forces
- water pressure forces
- expansion forces
- global fluid movements
- biological forces

fluid forces: water flowing downhill under influence of its own weight. moving water uses only part of downslope force, and portion left over may carry material in flow or along water-ground contact. water carries dissolved material that travels as the same velocity as water.)

expansion forces: heating and cooling cycles, freezing and thawing cycles, wetting and drying cycles

global fluid movements: wind carries sediment in much the same way as water does - along the 'bed' or in suspension. but, as air is far less dense a fluid than water, for the same flow velocity it carries sediment of smaller grain size.

deposition is the laying down of sediment by chemical, physical or biological means.

deposition
- when the transporting capacity of the fluid is insufficient to carry the solid sediment load, or where the chemical environment leads to the precipitation of the solute load, deposition of sediment occurs. sedimentary bodies occur where deposition outpaces erosion, and where chemical precipitation exceeds solutional loss.